---
title: "Radicle 1.0.0"
image: radicle-1.png
---

On March 26th, we [announced][rc1] the first release candidate for Radicle 1.0.0.
Today, after five months of feedback and 17 release candidates, we are ready to
launch Radicle `1.0.0`.

If you've been waiting for the right moment to try Radicle or to reintroduce
yourself to the stack, now is a great time to dive in: our [website][website]
and [guides][guides] should have all the information you need to get started.
You can also browse the latest [code][heartwood], hosted on Radicle.

If you've been tagging along, thank you, it's been a bumpy ride and we couldn't
have done it without you!

## Try it out!

You can grab the latest release with the following command:

    curl -sSf https://radicle.xyz/install | sh

Or head over to the [download](/download) section to download and verify the
binaries yourself.

## What's in the box 📦

Radicle 1.0.0 represents the culmination of [years](/history) of experimentation
and hard work from our team and community, where we set out to ensure that free
and open source software ecosystems can flourish without having to rely on the
whims of Big Tech. We designed Radicle with a first-principles approach, as a
natural extension to Git, expanding it to work in a collaborative, local-first,
peer-to-peer setting.

This milestone includes:

* An extensible, homegrown, peer-to-peer gossip and sync [protocol](/guides/protocol)
  built on the Git protocol.
* Social interactions such as issues, patches and code review, using our
  extensible [Collaborative Objects][cobs] system which keeps all artifacts
  in the repository.
* A secure authentication and authorization protocol using public key
  cryptography, which allows all published content to be verified locally,
  without centralized authority.
* An intuitive CLI that should be familiar to users of Git, as well as a web
  frontend for browsing Radicle repositories and seed nodes.
* Privacy at the protocol level, with truly private repositories and built-in
  [Tor support][tor].
* Reproducible and signed [builds](/download) for all Radicle binaries.

To us, Radicle 1.0.0 means that Radicle is *ready to use*. It stands as a
testament that sovereign code forges are possible today, and in our opinion,
*necessary*.

We feel comfortable now inviting you to join us, replicate, and
[collaborate](/guides/user) within the Radicle network or even [run a seed
node](/guides/seeder).

For an in-depth explanation of how Radicle works, check out our [Protocol
Guide](/guides/protocol).

## Stability ⛰️

Radicle 1.0.0 marks our commitment to stability: from this release onwards, all
changes to the protocol will be designed in backwards compatible way, and any
necessary change on the CLI will include a seamless upgrade path.

We are aware that the release candidate phase was rockier than expected for
some, but we are now in a good place to slow things down and improve stability.

Along with this commitment will come a more dependable and streamlined release
process which starts with this release!

## Future plans 🔮

There are several things in the pipeline that we intend to release when ready:

* Native CI/CD capabilities
* The Radicle TUI (Terminal User Interface)
* Advanced code review functionality
* An inbox system for repository notifications
* Multi-device support and user profiles
* Support for other canonical references, such as tags
* Seed node moderation and management tools
* The Radicle desktop application

## Growing ecosystem 🌱

Outside of the core stack, the ecosystem is growing nicely:  an independent
team working on integrations & tooling for Radicle has developed a [VS
Code][vscode] and [JetBrains][jetbrains] plugin. The Radicle network now also
comprises several deployments of the Radicle [frontend][fe], and there are more
than 40 seed nodes operating on the network, freely replicating user content.

## Invitation to forge the future 🤝

Once you [install][install] Radicle and set up your identity, you'll have access
to all public repositories on any public node, making it easier to explore and
contribute to the ecosystem. Compared to traditional self-hosted forges, which
often result in fragmented collaboration environments, Radicle represents an
evolutionary step for Git-based collaboration, with a single cryptographic
identity that works across nodes.

Lastly, in the spirit of free and open source software, we believe that power
lies in community. As we embark on further iterating the protocol and stack, we
also invite you to shape the future of Radicle with us. Your ideas and insights
are invaluable to our mission of creating a sovereign forge.

Together, we can make significant progress towards reclaiming the internet.

*Free your code!*

👾👾👾


[cobs]: /guides/protocol#collaborative-objects
[vscode]: https://app.radicle.at/nodes/seed.radicle.gr/rad:z3Makm6fsQQXmpSFE43DZqwupaEhk
[heartwood]: https://app.radicle.xyz/nodes/seed.radicle.xyz/rad:z3gqcJUoA1n9HaHKufZs5FCSGazv5
[jetbrains]: https://app.radicle.at/nodes/seed.radicle.gr/rad:z3WHS4GSf8hChLjGYfPkJY7vCxsBK
[fe]: https://app.radicle.xyz/nodes/seed.radicle.xyz/rad:z4V1sjrXqjvFdnCUbxPFqd5p4DtH5
[rc1]: https://x.com/radicle/status/1772659708978991605?s=20
[website]: /
[guides]: /guides
[user]: /guides/user
[install]: /guides/user#installation
[mirror]: /guides/user/#git-going-with-repositories
[tor]: /guides/user/#4-embracing-the-onion
