---
title: "Radicle 1.4.0 – Lily"
image: radicle-1.png
---

The Radicle team is delighted to announce the release of Radicle 1.4.0
(bbd1e2c), code name *Lily*. Going forward, we want to name our releases after
the abundant flowers and plants of this earth. We chose *Lily* as the first in
honor of Finland's national flower, the *Lily of the Valley*. The team is making
this release from Helsinki 🇫🇮

This release contains 67 commits by 5 contributors. It's exciting to
see our Zulip community growing and having patches from fresh contributors! 👾

Thanks to the following contributors for providing their time and effort for
this release:
- srestegosaurio
- Matthias Beyer
- Sebastian Martinez

## Installation

```
curl -sSf {{ site.url }}/install | sh -s -- --no-modify-path --version=1.4.0
```

## Canonical Reference Improvements

The canonical reference calculation was improved internally so that the
developers can better reason about the process. During this, it was noted that
the Radicle storage copy of the repository and the working copy of the
repository were both used during the process. By ensuring that the storage
copy is the only one used, a class of bugs is ruled out. This, however, means
that a `git push` will not fail when the pushed commit diverges, but will still
emit a warning that the new commit is diverging away from the other heads. We
weighed this up, and consider it an improvement, since the user is given control
of their own Git history.

Future improvements will provide ways of inspecting and resolving diverging
heads.

## Fixed Panics

Two instances of panics were fixed in this release.

The first, and most important, was a panic around serializing wire messages.
There is a strict size limit on the protocol messages that we control. However,
this size limit is not intended to be imposed on Git streams, for example during
fetching from other nodes. We incorrectly placed a check for this size limit in
the `serialize` function, which meant it would panic for some Git fetches. This
was fixed by moving the check elsewhere, while also improving the code so we do
not make that mistake again.

The second involved using the `read` method from the `sqlite` crate. This method
calls `try_read` and `unwrap`s the `Result`, which would cause a panic. We have
replaced the calls to `read` with `try_read` to more gracefully handle the
error.

## Improvements Towards Windows Compatibility

We have continued along the path towards compatibility by fixing some areas that
required some Windows specific handling. These included canonicalization of
paths, and using the correct named pipes location for the control socket.

## Improved Bootstrapping

Previously, we would use DNS to resolve to the IP address of bootstrap nodes,
which would be used as the bootstrap address. Now, we may also use the IPv4,
IPv6, and Tor addresses directly for bootstrapping.

## Improvements to `rad sync`

We now use a more suitable symbol in `rad sync status` for the status:

```
✗ Hint:
   ? … Status:
       ✓ … in sync          ✗ … out of sync
       ! … not announced    • … unknown
```

This aligns closer with the `rad node status` output. As well as this, the `Tip`
column was renamed to `SigRefs`, since the term `Tip` was too ambiguous.

The internal logic of `rad sync --announce` was improved by writing more tests
and finding edge cases to fix. Included in these improvements is changing the
target behavior. Before, the announcements would attempt to reach the preferred
seeds target *and* the replication factor. Now, it tries to reach the preferred
seeds and falls back to the replication factor.

## Improvements to `rad cob log`

The `rad cob log` command learned two new options, `--from` and `--to`. These
take a commit SHA that correspond to a COB operation, and allows you to limit
the log to start from or end the log at those operations, respectively.

## Various Improvements

We have made the errors that occur in `radicle-fetch` more fine-grained so that
we get better error reporting.

Also, thanks to Matthias Beyer for making improvements within our Rust code.
These may not be visible to the user, but they may improve some performance, and
improve the developers lives :)

## Changelog

This release contains 67 commit(s) by 5 contributor(s).

* `bbd1e2cff` **crates: 1.4.0 release** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `de38d9741` **build: move to use `releases/` prefix** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `819ae5fdf` **node/main: Refactor initialization of logging** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `bc4a13902` **systemd: Clean up default service configurations** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `25decf161` **systemd: Add example service hardening** *<lcdt@disroot.org>*
* `d7aa2d9da` **flake/hooks: Reconfigure Git Hooks** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `7d2f0e387` **node: e2e test for canonical ref update** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `0d96af5d0` **node: update default branch for canonical refs** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `c38b9d9e1` **node: simplify canonical reference calculation** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `a8255a2e0` **Introduce a node event for canonical reference updates** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `690f6b02c` **remote-helper: remove check for fast-forward** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `119a12489` **radicle: the great Canonical rewrite** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `8a66e4d04` **node/systemd: Check that received sockets are AF_UNIX** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `192cc993a` **radicle: Fix panic when reading from SQLite database fails** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `a568e7f48` **protocol: Refactor decoding** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `cbd2a7070` **protocol: Refactor encoding** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `a8426dfda` **protocol: Fix panic when serializing large frames** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `c5b99db10` **doc: Oversight when integrating winpipe** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `a4d83ec8d` **node/control: Please the borrow checker** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `fca96e697` **node: Fix test on Windows** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `19a262d3d` **node: Use winpipe for control socket on Windows** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `ce11f03fe` **radicle/profile: Control socket path for Windows** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `fd34b680b` **signals: Guard most of the crate for Unix** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `5229fb8a5` **fix: Normalize filesystem paths with `dunce`** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `31039bbce` **radicle-fetch: More fine-grained errors** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `d2517c500` **radicle-fetch: Fallback to known version** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `a670b6e66` **radicle: fix stream tests** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `0c6ff06c6` **radicle: use repository fixture in cob stream tests** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `1d7478cd9` **radicle: introduce `cob::common::Title`** *<me@sebastinez.dev>*
* `2a0f6fd3c` **cli: extend `rad cob log` behaviour** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `044ff8add` **radicle: introduce specialised Stream types** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `c0ac228c3` **radicle: introduce COB stream** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `9b59c0e2c` **radicle: add Op::load method** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `dbfcf424d` **radicle: add Op::manifest_of** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `bfe8c5234` **cob: add method for loading entry manifest** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `86119473b` **test: add alphanumeric generator** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `8953ec4c8` **cli/inbox: Clearify "clear" behaviour** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `9a7c22536` **radicle/config/node: Use newtypes** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `c4ff0d8ea` **radicle/config/node: Granular Default Values** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `77f63c76d` **Replace unit-returning-closure with drop()** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `cb7c748c6` **Move destructuring to fn signature** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `9486e751f` **Simplify impl of Display for some types** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `787cb3a87` **Collapse nested if** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `b0af48aa0` **To not allocate in good case** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `0200e84ae` **bootstrap: Add IPv6, IPv4, Onion addresses** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `6a1b13bb6` **cli: Use human-panic** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `f6f3be437` **cli/issue: Optimize how the issues are collected** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `b49ff9e5a` **radicle: Implement Iterator::size_hint() for optimizations** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `1e66c5764` **refactor: Replace return Err(anyhow!()) with anyhow::bail!()** *<mail@beyermatthias.de>*
* `01bed73a6` **cli: fix error formatting** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `ed5b2659c` **cli: Gracefully handle failure to link log file** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `de78cf787` **cli: Add verbose printing of authors** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `c8b6a13d6` **cli/sync/status: Refactor output table** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `c089727e9` **term, cli, remote-helper: Status Symbols** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `1cd3ad078` **node: Remove useless caching of node announcement** *<lorenz.leutgeb@radicle.xyz>*
* `efa7efacc` **radicle: Announcer test set constructions** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `c15288a69` **radicle: note about Announcer::can_continue** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `1b33229dd` **radicle: test Announcer::timed_out on success** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `11156619b` **radicle: Announcer test repeated sync** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `ce2d3eb07` **radicle: Announcer test synced with unknown node** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `ca7231e65` **radicle: Announcer test adapting the replication target** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `685c84e59` **radicle: Announcer with replication factor of 0** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `4307eb35b` **radicle: Announcer test AlreadySynced for preferred seeds** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `376a5566c` **radicle: Announcer test preferred seeds only** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `84f11f5e3` **radicle: Announcer ensures local node is ignored** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `8a6e55502` **radicle: Announcer can exit on preferred seeds or replication factor** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
* `d14709481` **fix: upgrade radicle-crypto** *<fintan.halpenny@gmail.com>*
## Checksums

```
82ad1e7f0afbf59bc95b6f9996bb5db570ba3661ce9644c370e8140a2364cdb3  radicle-1.4.0-x86_64-apple-darwin.tar.xz
937ddc7016fa0cbd9ce2449294939dcab6802880109ae58a5f4b7a03ae63d5b9  radicle-1.4.0-x86_64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.xz
6b673bae8d2531c07b3e1df853dbc0396397569aae29f5675b3bb4606306735e  radicle-1.4.0-aarch64-apple-darwin.tar.xz
d51ba8ca3b9277e5d06dcafee2ae04d9a4ad697b6bd57b33e436b559e85820e0  radicle-1.4.0-aarch64-unknown-linux-musl.tar.xz
```
